## Docker volumes are used to persist data and share it among containers. They provide an efficient way to store, retrieve, and backup data outside of a container's file system, ensuring that the data survives even after the container has been terminated.

## Persistent storage is any data storage device that retains data after power to that device is shut off. It is also sometimes referred to as non-volatile storage.

## Persistence: Data stored in a volume persists across container restarts and even after a container is removed.
## Storage Location: Volumes are stored in a part of the host filesystem which is managed by Docker (usually /var/lib/docker/volumes/).
## Two types of volumes:
### 1) Bind Mounts or Bind Host Directory as a Mount to Containers:
#### Bind mounts allow you to mount a specific directory or file from the host into the container.
#### Requires an absolute path source directory or file on the host machine and must pre-exist before the container starts. 

#### Below command mounts the directory on the host machine to container while running the container. 
`docker run -it --name <give-name-to-container> -v /absolute/path/on/host:/path/in/container <image_name>`  

#### Below command mounts the directory on the host machine to container while running the container and also logins into the container.(change the /bin/bash based on the image)
`docker run -it --name <give-name-to-container> -v /absolute/path/on/host:/path/in/container <image_name> /bin/bash`  

#### Using a relative path for the source directory (Docker 17.04 and above):
`docker run --mount type=bind,source="$(pwd)"/relative/path/on/host,target=/path/in/container <image_name>` 
#### $(pwd) = present working directory on the linux

#### Scenario: Use bind mounts during development to mirror source code files from your IDE into the container, enabling live-reloading of code changes in development environments. 

==================================================================================

### 2) Volume Mounts 
#### Volumes are the preferred mechanism for persisting data generated by and used by Docker containers. Docker manages the volume's lifecycle.
#### Stored in a part of the host filesystem managed by Docker (/var/lib/docker/volumes/ on Linux).
#### Can be created independently of any container.
#### Can be attached to one or multiple containers simultaneously.
#### Can be easily backed up, shared, or migrated.
#### Supports volume drivers, allowing data to be stored remotely, for example, on cloud providers.

#### Commands:
#### To create volume
`docker volume create <volume_name>`

#### Run a container with a volume mount:
`docker run -it --name <give-name-to-container> -v <volume_name>:/path/in/container <image_name>`

#### Run a container with a volume mount and logs into to container :
`docker run -it --name <give-name-to-container> -v <volume_name>:/path/in/container <image_name> /bin/bash`
#### Scenario: Use Docker volumes to persist database data between container restarts or to share data between multiple containers or services.


## Other commands to make a note
#### To list volumes
`docker volume ls`

#### To inspect volumes
`docker volume inspect <volume_name>`

#### To remove volume
`docker volume rm <volume_name>`

#### To Remove unused local volumes.  Unused local volumes are those which are not referenced by any containers
`docker volume prune`

#### To Remove one or more volumes
`docker volume rm <volume-name>`







